# Interrogating epigenetics in Lewy body disease in a multi-cohort meta-analysis of DNA methylation
Poster supplementary methods and data 

## Poster Citations
Pihlstrøm L, Shireby G, Geut H, Henriksen SP, Rozemuller AJM, Tunold JA, Hannon E, Francis P, Thomas AJ, Love S, Mill J, van de Berg WDJ, Toft M. Epigenome-wide association study of human frontal cortex identifies differential methylation in Lewy body pathology. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 22;13(1):4932. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32619-z. PMID: 35995800; PMCID: PMC9395387.

Smith RG, Pishva E, Shireby G, Smith AR, Roubroeks JAY, Hannon E, Wheildon G, Mastroeni D, Gasparoni G, Riemenschneider M, Giese A, Sharp AJ, Schalkwyk L, Haroutunian V, Viechtbauer W, van den Hove DLA, Weedon M, Brokaw D, Francis PT, Thomas AJ, Love S, Morgan K, Walter J, Coleman PD, Bennett DA, De Jager PL, Mill J, Lunnon K. A meta-analysis of epigenome-wide association studies in Alzheimer's disease highlights novel differentially methylated loci across cortex. Nat Commun. 2021 Jun 10;12(1):3517. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23243-4. PMID: 34112773; PMCID: PMC8192929.

Wheildon G, Smith AR, Weymouth L, Harvey J, Pishva E, Kouhsar M, MacBean LF, Troakes C, Smith RG and Lunnon K, DNA methylation profiling in Huntington’s disease reveals disease associated changes in the striatum and entorhinal cortex. (In Preperation)

Shireby, G., Dempster, E.L., Policicchio, S. et al. DNA methylation signatures of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology in the cortex are primarily driven by variation in non-neuronal cell-types. Nat Commun 13, 5620 (2022). 


## Supplementary Methods
### Meta-analysis cohort summaries

Samples were sourced from the UK Brain Bank Network (UKBBN), an online database covering brain bank centers across the UK and with annotation of demographics, neuropathological and clinical assessments. All available records on the UKBBN were downloaded (June 2019) for manual selection. Firstly, to determine LB positive case availability, records were filtered on a basis of neuropathological diagnostic criteria. Only cases with annotation of Braak LB Stage 3-6, or annotation of neocortical or limbic LB pathology were selected as Lewy body disease cases. The majority of samples matching our search criteria were found in brain banks at Oxford, Newcastle, Imperial College London and University College London. Samples were broadly sourced on the basis of a primary diagnosis of either Parkinson's Disease or Dementia with Lewy Bodies. Exclusions were made for non-sporadic PD (MSA, PSP etc.), severe cerebrovascular disease annotations or amygdala predominant pathology. 71 cases had annotation for LBD relevant pathology following the 2009 Unified staging scheme, but lacked Braak LB staging annotation (Beach et al. 2009). To harmonise these annotations for analysis alongside the Braak scheme, records were converted in accordance with the BrainNet Europe Consortium (Alafuzoff et al. 2009). 61 cases with “Neocortical Lewy Body Disease” were annotated as Braak LB Stage 6. The remaining 10 cases showed evidence from the available additional neuropathology notes of LB pathology in the temporal cortex or cingulate gyrus and were annotated as Braak LB Stage 5. From this criteria we selected 28 cases with Braak LB Stage 3, 39 cases with Braak LB Stage 4, 39 cases with Braak LB Stage 5 and 208 cases with Braak LB Stage 6. An additional 104 control individuals without neurological disease were sourced, which were chosen to exclude significant cerebrovascular pathology or AD-related pathology (Braak NFT stage > 2). In total, a set of 419 total donors were chosen, with two brain regions sourced for the majority of individuals. These brain regions were the CNG (Brodmann Area 24) and the PFC (Brodmann Area 9).

Data for the Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB) cohort was previously detailed in Pihlstrom et al 2022, in which they analysed PFC tissue from 73 control, 29 incidental Lewy Body disease, 139 PD (of which 74 were PDD), and 81 DLB patients(Pihlstrøm et al. 2022). Data from the Brains for Dementia Research Cohort (BDR) was previously detailed in Shireby et al 2022. Neurological controls were selected with absence of LB-pathology and low AD co-pathology (Braak NFT < 3). Eight samples overlapped between the UKBBN and BDR cohort, and were removed from the BDR cohort prior to analysis. Case samples were selected in keeping with the same criteria ans the UKBBN. 

Sample summary demographic tables can be found in supplementary tables.

### DNA methylation profiling
All cohorts analysed were consistent for laboratory methods in DNA methylation data generation, quality control and analysis. In brief, tissue pieces ranging between 25-35 mg were cut from frozen tissue, aiming where possible for inclusion of maximum amount of grey matter, before being milled over liquid nitrogen. Following tissue grinding DNA was extracted using the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA/miRNA Universal kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stored at 4°C. 500ng of genomic DNA from each sample was bisulfite treated using the Zymo EZ-96 DNA methylation Gold kit. Methylomic profiling was conducted using the Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC v1.0 BeadChip. 

### DNA methylation data quality control & pre-processing
Quality control was conducted similarly for each chapter utilising methylation array data, using the wateRmelon (Pidsley et al. 2013) R package as is standard practice in our group (Shireby et al. 2022; R. G. Smith et al. 2021). The following steps were carried out:
Signal intensity assessment: The intensity of methylated and unmethylated values is one of the best indicators of individual sample data quality. The median methylated and unmethylated intensity value was calculated respectively for each sample and assessed for low intensity samples indicative of poor quality. An arbitrary threshold of 2000 is recommended by Illumina as a cutoff for retention of samples, however this threshold is often altered based on individual sample intensities per study. This allows for removal of samples that deviate from the main cluster and represent potential systematic batch processing effects. We applied variable thresholds for each dataset used, dependent on the spread of data within each study.
#### Bisulphite conversion statistic: 
A BS-conversion statistic, which represents the median BS-conversion percentage per sample, was calculated using the bscon function in wateRmelon and assessed similar to intensity values for potential outlier effects. A threshold of 80% minimum conversion rate was applied for sample retention. 
##### Sex check: 
To catch potential sample misannotation or swaps during the array running procedure, it is routine to compare the reported sex of each sample to a predicted sex annotation based on the DNA methylation data. DNA methylation values show highly divergent profiles by biological sex, in particular on the X and Y chromosomes, but also at thousands of autosomal sites (Y. Wang et al. 2021). This was assessed using principal components, extracting the two with the highest overall correlation with reported sex. The eigenvalues of these principle components (PCs) are then plotted on a scatterplot, coloured by reported sex and samples clustered with a discordant sex were removed. 
#### Genotyping assessment: 
59 probes on the EPIC array and 65 probes on the 450K array are designed to be sensitive to highly selective SNP positions in the human genome. These probes lack enough number to assess sample relatedness but can be used to determine samples sourced from the same individual, for example in a longitudinal design or a study involving multiple tissue samples from the same person. They can also be used to determine cryptic relatedness (i.e. samples that show a high degree of genetic relatedness that should be independent). This was assessed by measuring the Pearson’s correlation coefficient across these SNP probes, with a threshold of > 0.95 being indicative of samples from the same genotype. If samples showed cryptic relatedness where there should not be, or alternatively lacked relatedness where it was expected, they were removed. If this was clearly driven by one sample being of low quality, solely the low quality sample was dropped, otherwise both samples were removed.  
#### Beadcount and detection p-value filtering: 
The Infinium microarray contains several thousand sequence specific oligonucleotide coated beads which DNA hybridises to. Broadly, for a particular locus, more beads being present for a particular sequence increases the reliability of detection of signal for that probe. Another influencing factor on the reliability of a particular probe’s reading is the difference between the detectable intensity versus the background. This is summarised by detection p-values, which test the difference in an individual probe’s intensity against a set of control probes on the array. The pfilter() function in wateRmelon leverages both beadcount and detection p-values to remove poor quality samples and poor quality probes. Standardly, for a particular probe, if the percentage of samples with a beadcount < 3 is greater than 5%, the probe is excluded. If a probe has a detection p-value > 0.01 for greater than 1% of all sample, that probe is also removed. For a particular sample, if the percentage of probes with detection p-value > 0.01 is greater than 1% then the sample is removed.   
#### Outlier detection: 
Outliers within a particular DNA methylation dataset are indicative of potential processing confounding or poor quality and add unwanted noise into the analysis. To reduce potential outlier effects, the outlyx() function in wateRmelon was used to locate potential outliers. This function uses Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and a Mahalanobis distance measure to determine individual sample level differences to the entire high dimensional dataset. This is implemented using the pcout() function in the mvoutlier package, with outlier samples being determined as a value < 0.15. It also implements an interquartile range based method, based on outliers outside of a threshold determined by the quartiles of the first PC. 
Removal of cross hybridising and SNP probes: A set of probes which inherently have low reliability, as determined by previous studies, are also routinely removed from analyses. The presence of common SNPs within ~10bps of a particular CpG site can influence the probe binding and bias the measurement of methylation at that particular site (Price et al. 2013). Thus, probes with annotated SNPs within close proximity are removed. Another set of probes have been shown to lack specificity for their target sequences and cross-hybridise to other parts of the genome, leading to inaccurate DNA methylation estimation (Y. A. Chen et al. 2013; McCartney et al. 2016). These are also removed from analysis. 
#### Normalisation:
Following QC and removal of samples of spurious quality, beta values were normalised. It has been shown previously that the performance of the type I and II probes on the array differ and to reduce confounding in analysis, data is first normalised to allow for comparable distributions of data between differing samples. A large number of normalisation methods exist that employ differing approaches to correct for this distributional bias. Our group most routinely employs dasen normalisation, implemented within the wateRmelon package and the advised method from the original publication describing the method(Pidsley et al. 2013). The method employs a quantile normalisation approach, first equalising the type I and II backgrounds and then quantile normalising the type I and II probes separately. Unmethylated and methylated intensities in this method are also quantile normalised separately before being merged.  
This normalisation process was assessed by visual inspection of the beta distributions before and after normalisation for type I and II probes for a clear bimodal distribution with minimised between sample variance following normalisation. A method of quantifying this normalisation process is via a normalisation violence statistic using the qual() function in wateRmelon. This calculates four metrics of difference between the raw and normalised data, including root mean square deviation, sum of absolute differences and sample ratio mismatch. Samples that have required more dramatic transformation to be brought in line with the rest of the data will be evident at this point as an outlier and can be removed from the analysis on this basis. 
#### Cell Type Deconvolution
DNA methylation profiles vary significantly between differing cell types and thus different proportions of cell types in a heterogeneous bulk tissue sample represent a substantial confounder to DNA methylation analyses. As purifying cell types is often not viable for most EWAS studies, a common way to address this confounding is through cell type deconvolution models, which estimate the proportion of each cell type expected in a tissue. This requires a reference dataset which has been purified for a given tissue being analysed. The most commonly used reference based deconvolution method and the one used in this thesis is Houseman’s method (Houseman et al. 2016), which uses known differentially methylated positions (DMPs) that most differentiate cell types within a tissue. These regions are used to estimate the proportion of constituent cell types using constrained projection and quadratic programming. This method is implemented using the projectCellTypeWithError() function within the CETYGO package, using the reference panel resolving profiles for GABAergic neuron, Glutamatergic neuron, Oligodencyte, Microglia and Astrocyte enriched reference data (Hannon et al. 2024). 
The CETYGO uncertainty metric was also assessed (Vellame et al. 2023). This measure is an indication of the quality of a particular deconvolution, by applying a root mean square error between the actual methylation profile at sites used for the deconvolution to the expected profile if the predicted proportions were true. CETYGO scores of >0.1 are indicative of poor applicability of a reference panel to the tissue being deconvoluted and are potentially evidence of poor sample quality


### Within cohort epigenome wide association assessment
Prior to meta-analysis, association with LB Braak stage was assessed within each cohort in a harmonised approach. Within each cohort, linear models were fit using the base lm() function in R to test for associations between LB Braak Stage and DNA methylation at each site of the genome. This is displayed by the following equation:

$CpG Site\sim BraakLBstage + Age + Sex + PMI + CellProportions + Batch + Braak NFTstage...$

For the UKBBN analysis, given two brain regions were present per individuals, this caused a violiation of linear regression by non-independence between samples type. To correct for this, a mixed effect model was employed using the lme() function within the nlme package. Brain region was included as a fixed effect covariate and individual ID was supplied as a random-intercept covariate to account for paired observations. This can be displayed in the following formula:

$CpG Site\sim BraakLBstage + Age + Sex + PMI + CellProportions + Batch + Braak NFTstage + Brain Region...(1|Individual)$

Consistent covariates of Age, Sex, PMI, cell proportions and Braak NFT stage were included. For the UKBBN and BDR cohorts, brain bank source and array plate batch were included as processing batch variables. For NBB, only processing plate batch was included. For each cohort, model inflation was assessed genome wide and surrogate variables added to reduce the lambda value below a 1.1 threshold. One surrogate variable was included for BDR and three were included for NBB, with no surrogate variables required to reduce inflation in UKBBN. 

### Meta analysis
Estimated regression coefficients and standard errors were extracted from each model and used for meta-analysis of all probes overlapping each dataset (n = 774,310). Harmonised models were meta-analysed using the metagen function in the meta R package, as has been employed for previous EWAS meta-analysis (Fodder et al. 2023; Pihlstrøm et al. 2022; G. Shireby et al. 2022; R. Smith et al. 2020), which applies an inverse variance weighting. Both fixed and random effects were assessed, with the fixed effects model being the primary interpreted results. In addition to fixed and random effects modelling statistics (Effect estimates, standard error and p-values), the $I^2$ heterogeneity measure and p-values were also extracted. 

For interpretation of results strict genome wide significance was based on simulation and permutation testing to define a  significant threshold as determined by Mansell and colleagues in their 2019 publication. This approach sets a consistent significance threshold of p-value < 9 × 10-8 for any study utilising the Illumina EPIC array and was determined based on multiple permutations of null EWAS study scenarios to determine a 5% family wise error rate (Mansell et al. 2019). A more lenient multiple testing False Discovery Rate significance threshold (corrected q < 0.05) was also interpreted. Finally for more exploratory post-hoc analysis, a lenient nominal threshold of uncorrected P < 1 x 10-5 was applied.
